 Imagine that you control a drone. The drone looks at that reality where it is, sends me information, and I get the conscious experience of what the drone is seeing. That conscious experience is not in my body, it's in my consciousness. A scientific theory that basically states that our body is operated like a drone from a conscious quantum field, which would mean that experience qualia is not in your head. The qualia do not exist in the body, the existing field. Okay, people will find this crazy idea. It is crazy, but it is much closer to the truth. Federico Fushin invented the first CPU, the touchpad, and worked on the first neural nets, which gave him the hope of creating conscious AI. Took me 30 years to figure out that mathematics is created by consciousness, and therefore I cannot explain consciousness with mathematics. People, many physicists think that there is emerging, emerging properties in the purely classical world. It cannot be. Emergentism requires quantumness. Like some other renowned physicist, Fushin is convinced that consciousness cannot be a classical phenomenon and has to be quantum, but his theory of quantum consciousness goes beyond any theories on the table. We have to go way beyond Schrodinger's equation. We have to go into the Rach's equation, but even beyond that, we have to go to quantum fields and quantum information. A quantum information goes beyond the concepts of quantum fields. In fact, the only physicist that has been able to show the quantum physics derived from quantum information is an Italian physicist, Dracomomauro Daryano, who showed that you can derive all the equations of quantum physics from quantum bits. Federico Fushin reached out to Maraudariano and together they published a paper and Federico wrote this book. If they are right, not only will they have an accurate theory of consciousness, they will also solve the mystery of the interpretation of quantum mechanics. Quantum information is the representation of inner experience and the collapse of the way function is the representation of my free will. What more do you want? That's crazy. That's crazy. Let's try and really understand this. Welcome to the Ascension Foundation's YouTube channel. Thanks for watching and may I ask you to like and subscribe as it really helps us to grow our channel. Now this interview was recorded when Federico visited the Netherlands to present his new book Irreducible. A link to the book and scientific papers are in the description below. In his book, Federico describes how a deeply personal experience led him to start investigating consciousness. Therefore, I found it interesting to start our conversation with this personal experience. Of course, after that we go into the theory itself. In the chapter marks below, you can see the topics we discussed. Now without further ado, here is Silicon Hero and Consciousness Pioneer Federico Fushin. Federico, can you tell us about a pivotal moment in your life? Namely, the experience you had at Lake Tahoe, where I pronounced it correctly. During your Christmas holidays of 1990. Yeah, I wasn't happy. You know, and I reached everything that the world says that if you do all this stuff, you should be happy. And I wasn't. I realized that I was faking, being happy because I needed to because I was running a company. I had to be enthusiastic and everything else, but I was dying inside. So what's going on? What's wrong with this picture? And consciousness then became center stage in my life. Understanding that consciousness somehow was also connected with feeling, you know, that's spreading inside. So what's going on? So I wanted to understand what consciousness is. So that's when, you know, and I wanted to understand it from my own sake, not to do something about it, not to monetize, not to make a new technology, because before it was all about, you know, doing something, you know, and now, the Sunday night, turned my attention inside because of the suffering. And it was in this climate that I had this extraordinary experience of consciousness. Now I can go to this Tahoe night, you know, in 1990 during the Christmas holidays, we had a home up in Tahoe, which is a lake Tahoe is a beautiful lake, 2500 meters, and mountains and skiing is great. And so, you know, one night I woke up, midnight, you know, I was thirsty, went to get a glass of water, and went back to bed, and just, you know, just waiting for, you know, to go back to sleep, not thinking nothing, and always saddened out of the chest. Just the, you know, just energy was coming out of my chest, but it was love. And it was love that was never felt before. It was, it was love that was coming from me. How can love come from me? I mean, you know, it was unthinkable that love could come from me. You know, and it was 10,000 times more powerful than any love that I felt before. I mean, in fact, I never felt that love because it was unconditional love. Now I have a name for it. It was love. Period. It was, yes, it was coming from me, but it was love. And it was light, it was a white light, scintillating. It was, you know, like, like sparkles, you know, and it was coming out. And then it explodes and is everywhere. But it's everywhere, but my consciousness is there too. So not only my consciousness is within me, but it's also outside of me, and all of a sudden I realize I am that. So I am the observer and the observer simultaneously. But I retain my point of view. I retain my identity. I was still the same kid of five years old, or three years old kid that I was then. And so, and that I am now. And so that identity, what so my, the only thing that made me to remain was that point of view. And then I realized, oh my god, this stuff is the stuff which everything is made. Everything comes from this stuff. And my body was hard. It was vibrating, you know, like the cells of my body were resonating with this thing. You know, of course, the emotions, the feelings was love, joy and peace. Because this stuff felt like that's me. I'm at home. This is me. So I'm finally home. This is the, you know, this is home. But so it was all mixed up. You could not separate this stuff. You know, love, joy and peace. And then the mind was aligned, saying, this is the stuff of everything is made. So I'm everything, but also the observer of everything. So I'm a point of view of one with which one knows itself. And now is the centerpiece of this new theory of consciousness that we may talk later. Yeah, beautiful. I mean, I was a physicalist. I thought, you know, basically, you know, materialist because I study physics, you know, and everybody knows them. Consciousness comes from matter. Perhaps we don't know how, but has to come from matter. Well, I can't come from. So I mean, that was the mindset that I was. So all of a sudden, how can, you know, now this is before matter somehow, you know, so this must be the beginning of it. So, you know, that changed it. And that, you know, that started me in a completely different, a when orthogonal in terms of my personal development and thinking while I was running synaptics. So that was fine. But I spend from that point on 30 to 40 percent of my time trying to understand what happened and studying, doing meditation, you know, figuring, you know, anything that I could understand to understand what happened. But that picture actually is the end, now I can explain with this new theory of consciousness. I can explain exactly what happened and exactly why that is correct. Every, see, every single one of us is a field that is both the observer, the observed, and the actor. Every one of us is a field and it doesn't exist in this field, does not exist in space and time. Space time is exist within these fields that we are, it's us. So, I mean, this changes the paradigm, right? But we need a change of paradigm because otherwise, if we are machines like scientism is telling us, we are, we are going to be taken over by the machines, artificial intelligence, the people will control, powerful people will control and through those machines they can control us if we don't change our mind of who we are. It will become a self-fulfilling prophecy because we have not done the personal work to understand what we are and we are now machines. The body is a machine but is a machine that is infinitely more complex than the computers because it is a quantum and classical machine, it's not a machine like a computer. Just to, you know, it's simple to understand that every cell of my body is a part hole of the body. What do I mean by that? Every cell of my body has the genome of the egg that created the entire organism. So, every part of my body has the potential knowledge of the hole. In this case, the hole is just the body. So, we are allographic. We are allographic. We are made of parts hole. We have 50 trillion cells. Each has the potential knowledge of the whole organism. So, a cell which is a part can change within its own life by taking advantage of the potential knowledge of the hole. That's why epigenetics exists. 20 years ago, if you said epigenetics, you would have put, you know, into the corner as a, you know, as a crazy guy. Okay, now we know the epigenetic exists. Why? Because every part is a part hole. So, we as human beings, we are fields which are part hole of one, the totality of what exists. Same pattern repeated at different scales. Very nice. We are going deeper right now and I think good for people to understand this comes from the architect of the first microprocessor. If we have that cell, that part hole, as you mentioned. And we have a modern day microprocessor that many people attribute sort of the same intelligence or complexity to because that's the idea, right? Because it's just so many connections, so many computing power. So, many people think we will achieve sort of cell like and then of course, organism like intelligence. Can you just on the ground level make that comparison, the cell versus the microprocessor? Yeah. A microprocessor is made of switches, on, off, on, off, on, off. What does this switch know about the hole? The old computer. Nothing. It doesn't know anything. The most, all that it could possibly know is that it's open or close. And it, but it can do nothing else. Every cell on my body is connected to the hole through this quantum fields because a cell is a quantum classical thing. It's not a classical thing. It has been studied as biochemistry, but biologists is an informational system of a kind that we have still to understand the foundation is quantum and classical, quantum and classical. Nobody understands our life works because way beyond what we understand, we think is a mechanism. And that's because those cells remain connected with the fields because they're made of particles and quantum physics is telling us that particles are not objects. Particles are states of a field. They cannot be taken away from the fields. They are not separable from the fields. They are like a wave of the sea cannot be taken out of the sea. But what many people I think, and this we really need to clarify, I think, okay, in a cell we have proteins bumping around which are in the end complex molecules. In a computer we have electrons that are also particles. What exactly makes the molecules, the particles within the cell quantum classical and a computer purely classical? Because I'd say okay, aren't there quantum effects as well in computers that connect them to that field you were talking about? Yeah, but the quantum effects are incoherent and they cancel out. So the quantumness is canceled out. The bit is the average of quantum phenomena. They cancel out. And then therefore is a, first of all, the bit is not a physical thing. It's an abstraction that we have created. What is zero and what is one? We have determined. And as long as within the system, the zero and the one as the simplest possible symbols can be recognized as zero and one. That's all that is needed. So if you maintain that coherence, but it's a classical coherence because the zero and the one are classical information that can be reproduced. A quantum bit cannot be reproduced. A quantum bit. When you measure the quantum bit you get zero or one in the direction in which you measure it. But you have to set the direction because if you don't know the direction, whichever any direction that you choose you will find zero or one. The olive of theorem says that the maximum information that you can get from a quantum bit is a classical bit. The quantum bit cannot be known. The not-cloning theorem says that you cannot clone even a quantum bit. Yeah, once we want to know the quantum state, it will collapse in a state which is say zero or one and we are in a classical one. Yeah, but that's the information. You are in classical. So quantum information cannot be reproduced. Quantum information cannot be reproduced. Classical information can be reproduced. We are quantum fields. What we feel within can be represented by quantum information. But what we feel goes beyond the representation. The representation is mathematics. It's the map. What we feel is the territory. It's what we feel is only within the field. That's how we know. The meaning is within us. It's within the field. It's not in the information. Physics, the information in physics has no meaning. And the problem with the current world view is that if you start with this type of information, there is no meaning. Then you cannot conclude that the universe is without meaning and purpose just because you have started that way. But in fact, if you start with quantum information, people cannot explain why you cannot copy quantum information. Why cannot copy quantum information? Then the new theory says that consciousness and free will are foundational cannot be explained with anything simpler. But if you start with that, you can explain why quantum physics must be the way it is. Exactly. Again, again, the silicon gate technology turning around the problem. You go from here to there. Instead of going from there to here. And there is collapse of the wave function which are free wills decision of the field or the various fields that are interacting and creating this thing that emerges from these fields. The particle is not separable from the fields. It's integral to the fields. Then they forget about it. Then they think of the particle a little ball. The people that study biology think that their cell is classical. It is not classical. They think of the rule of large numbers because quantum effects are on a sort of sub-atomic particle level and it filters out. It cancels out and then we have the classical world which is again, they don't have to decide. They work together to create these structures that they don't even understand that that's going on right now. They don't understand how this cell works as a totality. We are instructed not to understand. And we are going through a blinders. We don't understand. I mean, for example, about 10 years ago, so a few physicists and biologists, but people with strong knowledge of physics study and say, hey, but life must be something quantum in life. Oh, forget it. No, possible. And they were ostracized. Eventually, there is a very small counter quantum biologists call now. People are trying to understand life as a quantum phenomenon. They are still ostracized, but at least now they have some money to do research. But for 10 years, it was like, everybody knows that this dog mass of the orthodoxy of science impeding us to really make progress. It's time to stop this. But there is a strong desire for this orthodoxy to keep this materialist and reductionist framework that has shown that it's no longer valid. Everybody knows. I mean, people that really think, but they don't want that because it's power. And how? But if we go back, I really like when you talk about her, because I think that's the real not-samples. We go into the eukaryotic cell and we see the proteins. We have to DNA. We have all the action going on in the cell, which is tremendously complex. But we think we can reduce it to first principles, because we know what those molecules do to each other. And then it's just a rule of large numbers, which will give us sort of the action of the cell and we'll build up to the organism. But you were saying that on that level, quantum effects are playing a role, which make action within the cell in deterministic and even a free will decision. Absolutely. But the free will decision is not in the cell. It's in the fields that control the cell. See, I was mentioning before that a particle, like an electron, doesn't exist separate from the fields. It's a state of the field. The, from physics point of view, ontology isn't the field. It's not in the particles. Because the particles are integral to the field. So they come and they go. If a particle existed, it wouldn't disappear, right? But an electron can appear and disappear. But it is a state of a field that appears or disappear. That is nothing more. There is no particle. But physicists, the particles, I see the particles. No, you don't see the particles. You see the effect of the state of the field on this classical world. And then you see something, but that is not a particle. That is the effect of something that was amplified in a huge number of times to give you what you call a particle. And to clarify this for people, when we talk about quantum and classical, the classical world is the world of matter that we know that seems to behave deterministically. And the quantum world, of course, is a world of probabilities, right? Of multiple states being possible at once. And how exactly do they relate if you say quantum classical? So what bit of our body is classical? Of course, my body doesn't evaporate while I'm sitting here. So that would make it classical. But my thoughts are quantum. Yes. Okay. So first of all, there is no clear boundary between classical and quantum. In other words, we again want to put things into boxes. That's the first mistake. There are no separate boxes. One is holistic. The reality, deeper reality is holistic. Means is not made of separable parts. And it's not made of separable concepts, which is even deeper. So even true or false is a approximation of reality valid under certain conditions. Like one in zero are valid for a certain temperature and pressure or the computer. If you change the temperature, it doesn't work anymore because that distinction cannot longer be valid in a world where there are, you know, there is a continuity. There is everything is connected with everything else. So we don't want that world because you cannot control that world. So the problem now is a problem of power and control behind this desire to have a deterministic and reductionistic world, which is the materialist philosophy, which is time to abandon that because quantum physics already is saying that that doesn't work. You know, according to quantum physics, the universe is holistic. It's not made of separable parts. Everything is connected. Everything is connected from the inside. But according to most physicists, there is no inside because everything, you know, they think that all that exists is actually what you can measure. But that is not possible. Nobody can understand why quantum computers work because their actual operation cannot occur in space time. It must occur in what is called Hilbert space. But Hilbert space is supposed to be a mathematical abstraction. So how can you do operations in an abstract space or mathematics? You see, it's incoherent, but nobody wants to think deeply about this stuff because nobody has ever taught how to think deeply about stuff. They want to solve the problem and give me an equation and solve the equations. But the equations are created by consciousness. It is consciousness that creates mathematics, not mathematics that creates consciousness. It took me 30 years to figure out that mathematics is created by consciousness. And therefore I cannot explain consciousness with mathematics. And I realized that I was trying to do the same because I was taught that way. I had to turn it around. Again, turn it around. And we can only touch, let's say, but we can touch it at the outer surface of consciousness with mathematics. It's our own understanding of ourselves. So would the Schrodinger's wave function, which describes the state of a quantum system? Is that touching on the outside of consciousness? Is that as close as we can get with mathematics? Of course. In fact, we have to go way beyond Schrodinger's equation. We have to go into the rocks equation, but even beyond that, we have to go to quantum fields. So N quantum information, and quantum information goes beyond the concepts of quantum fields. In fact, the only physicist that's been able to show the quantum physics derives from quantum information is an Italian physicist, Jacques Momauda-Dariano, University of Pavia. And it took me 15, 20 years to do that. And in show that you can derive all the equations of quantum physics from quantum bits. So you remember probably about John Wheeler, you know, it from bit. Yeah, he had the original intuition that information had to be more profound, more deeper than matter. It from bit. So the bit was deeper, but he should have said it from Cupid, but never mind. Because the deeper information is quantum information. And Daryano and his collaborators prove that you can derive quantum physics from quantum information. So quantum information now becomes the ontology based on Daryano's work. What would be a way for people to understand what quantum information really is? It's basically instead of having bits, you know, arrangements of bits, you have arrangements of quantum bits. A quantum bit, imagine a quantum bit as a one of the infinite possibilities that can be represented as a point on the surface of a sphere. So you have a sphere, every point on the surface of a sphere, which would correspond into a direction in 3D, is one of the possible states. So a Cupid implies an infinity of states, but when you make a measurement, all you can find 0, 1. So when you make a measurement, you disturb this quantum bit. So you don't, you know, you basically, and you disturb it in the direction in which you make the measurement, and you get 0 or 1. And that's it. In any direction that you measure, you get 0, 1, but you don't get 0, 1 repeatedly. You get it with some probability. So the quantum physics doesn't tell you what the next state is. It only can tell you the probability of all the possible states that you can measure. So in the case of a quantum bit, it tells you, if you measure in this direction, let's say, it tells you the probability that you get a 0 or 1, but it doesn't tell you that you get a 0 or 1. So the fundamental difference between quantum physics and classical physics is that quantum physics is indeterminate, meaning it doesn't tell you. It only can tell you probability, but not the probability of what you will measure. Now, the probability of all the possible states that you can measure. What you can measure, yeah. Okay. And the, the, to go from this probability field to what you will measure, there is no physics, there is the collapse of the wave function. It's just a way of saying that we don't know. Basically, you go from, you have an interaction between the fields and an instrument that doesn't measurement. And somehow, in this interaction, you get one state. But, but that state that you get, you can only know the probability and you don't know how you get that state. Not only that, but we know that that state is random, but also that randomness is not algorithmic, is beyond algorithms. And that's the rub. That's where, that's where free will is. In this theory with the Rihanna, we say, free will is what is happening with what we call collapse of the wave function is a free will decision of the field of whatever particle you're measuring. And because that's interesting, because I always thought, because the rule of large numbers, when we do quantum measurements over and over a thousand times, then we get again a probabilistic or sorry, a deterministic world, because you then just get a, a wave function that will give you sort of, but inside the cell, you only, you only get one, you only want, you do one thing at a time, you don't, you don't repeat the things. Yeah, now I get it. I get it. That's crazy. That's crazy. Let's try and really understand this. Okay, classical information, information we can share, because it's like written here, that we can, I kind of show around. I kind of show around what I'm feeling right now to all of you. So the moment I speak a word, I've made a feeling I had, it's, I've turned into classical information. You take something which is private that cannot be reproduced, can only be represented by quantum information, but the representation is not what you feel. The representational reality is not reality. A theory of reality is not reality. Okay. So what you feel, only you, field, not body, you field can actually know and you know inside. And what you can say about what you feel, is a small part of what you feel. Or leave us theorem, one bit per quantum bit. And the quantum bits are entangled, so they're, they have states in common with the bits don't have states in common. It's zero or one. There is nothing else, but quantum bits may have states in common, meaning that the probability, the two probabilities are connected. And to show this connection, you cannot do, you, you have to describe the quantum state in Hilbert space, which is an end-dimensional space with complex dimensions. Where the dimensions are complex numbers, you know, it's just that enough to give you headache, right? But that's what you need. You cannot represent them in this way. So what does it mean? That there is a deeper reality where, where the feelings and the fields exist, the meaning of information exist, that, and from that world, you have this world, that is a classical world where you can get classical information. And we think that the only world that, world that exists is this world. But this world we have constructed with our bodies, and it's a way to look at it. I think you have this metaphor yet in silicon that, would it be like consciousness being the field, writing a book, and the book itself is our space-time dimension, our body sitting here, or a film recording a film and showing it, the film shown on the screen of percent. Yeah, but, but the book emerges into this three-dimensional reality, but the writer of the book isn't a deeper vast reality. It's not in the book. And my body here, my body here is a sentence in that book. The body is a symbol. It's a symbol of a complexity which is unfathomable for now. Okay, people will find this crazy idea. It is crazy. Yeah, but it is, it is much closer to the truth than what you get from the scientism. Yeah, because that I wanted to ask if we, it's crazy, but quantum theory is crazy. So if we have the other explanation, if we don't want to go to consciousness, if we say no, it's still matter all the way down. How then, where do we then end up with an interpreting quantum mechanics? Then we have to go like many worlds or how, how do you... That is no interpretation that anybody can agree on. And for the 100 years, I mean, this problem has been discussed for a hundred years, and there is no interpretation whatsoever about quantum physics. Couldn't we say there's a multiverse with everything possible, being possible in other dimensions? Yeah, but but but but but but it's it doesn't explain anything. But what is it explaining? When I say consciousness in free will must be taken as foundational as a postulate, okay? Why do I say that? Because postulates are to be self-evident. The condition to accept the postulate is a self-evident. Why is a self-evident? Because you and I are conscious. You and I know that we have limited, but we have free will, limited, but we have it. So we know already that. How can you explain free will and conscious with something that doesn't have either? You cannot explain it. How can you explain consciousness with math when is conscious that create a math? When can you explain free will with something that doesn't have free will? You see, it's foolish to think that, you know, that you can explain, you know, more will less. And today we talk about emergent properties. You know, we explain everything with emergentism, but as in many emergenties, how can you get more or less? You cannot. You can be less, you can get less from more. You can get determinism from indeterminism. You can get unconsciousness from consciousness, not the other way around. And that's so simple and so common sense, but science doesn't want to go there. Why? Scientists doesn't want to go there. Why? Because you lose your power. Because if I know the equations, I know more than you. And that's not acceptable. Because nobody knows the equations. Because there is no equations that describe free will. Free will is an act that no laws can tell what the free will can give you. And people want to predict the future. Their safety is in the prediction of the future. Their sense of power is in the prediction of the future. You cannot predict the future. Because it's based on free will. Nobody wants to go there right now. But that's the only way to go to be safe from this idea that we are machines and that artificial intelligence will best us. Your postulate of free will, you experience free will, isn't that just an illusion? I mean, does free will truly exist? Or is it something we think we have? Why do you, people that say this, you have to ask them, why do you insist that there is no free will? What do you get by insisting that there is no free will? Think deeply about that. What do you get by thinking that there is no free will? That you do not have any free will? Why do you want that? And if you answer that question, they have to answer that question. But if they answer that question, they will find out more about themselves. And eventually, they will have to agree that they have a hidden desire to control, to have power. Because they know the equations. They know more than you. That's the point. I mean, I was there. I had taken the same courses. I learned the same physics. And if I did not have this experience, that told me that I'm more. I couldn't be here saying these things. But now, I can, you know, with this experience, I was able to invert our understanding and point in the way to a different way to understand. So, you know, if it's bullshit, it would be found to be bullshit. But don't say there is bullshit just because you don't want to even think about it. And that's the problem today. People, the first time they hear the wrong word from them, they shut off and not, you know, they don't even want to think about it. But actually, the reason why we know is because we are conscious. The reason why we know is because we are conscious. Because consciousness is what allows us to know. Computers don't know. It's foolish to think that computers understand. They don't understand. There is no meaning in the bits. The meaning can only be quantum. It can only be something that exists in the fields. It doesn't even exist in quantum information. Quantum information can only represent what we know as meaning. You see, mathematics stops there for now. But there is a new math to be developed to go from qualia, qualia, which is sensations and feelings that can be represented by quantum information. Quantum information cannot represent the meaning. They represent the qualia. That's all they can do, which is how we feel. But qualia is the beginning of the inner journey. Qualia are the bringers of meaning. And we look for meaning. First comprehension and then meaning. Comprehension gets you to meaning. Meaning is the essence of comprehension. Meaning is what you get after you got it. You know, I got it. I understand it now. That's beyond comprehension. Your comprehension is a path to meaning. And meaning is the ontology. The ontology is in the meaning and the experience in what we feel and what we know from within. Not outside. If you say meaning is the ontology, so meaning is what ultimately exists in our universe. Yeah. Yeah. But in order to make it more understandable, I start with a postulate. I start this all basic, rich framing with a postulate. Because I'm joining science and spirituality. I'm joining the outer and the inner. Science is about the outer world. But meaning, experience, consciousness, free will is about the inner world. And right now, there's separate. There is this spiritual people that think that this exists. But you know, the scientist doesn't mean. This guy's looking at those guys and it doesn't matter. So there is this separation now between science and spirituality. This way of thinking brings them together. They integrate them. Don't just oppose them. They integrate. They become one. They become one. So how do we start? So if we want to start like a new theory, I start with a postulate. Because you have to. Because you can never start with something that is true. Because you have shown to be true. You have to start with a postulate. Even in math, you start with a postulate. They are taken to be true. And they have to be self-evident. Yeah. Sure. Ground assumption. Ground assumption. But that's ground assumption is to be self-evident. The ground assumption of quantum physics, they are so self-evident that you have to study ten years before you say, oh yeah, they are evident. Not self-evident. They are evident after ten years. So they don't pass the test of self-evidence to me. Okay, now I'm going to tell you a postulate that is self-evident. One, the totality of what exists. One, the totality of what exists. As three properties, dynamic, dynamic means it's never the same instant after instant. It's holistic means it's not made of separable parts. And so far I have described the universe, describe a quantum physics. As all this trip, you know, is all the resist, dynamic, holistic. I add one more thing, one more quality. One wants to know itself. One wants to know itself. Now this comes from perennial philosophy. Knowing that self was in the Dalfi, you know, temple. It was part of the Greek, some of the Greek philosophers. But divaidas were saying the same thing. All the basic experiences of the deeper, the people that went deeper into the understanding of reality come to the same general conclusion that there is one that has those properties and they want to know itself. If I look within myself, what do I want to know when I was suffering? Who am I? Why am I here? Why am I suffering? That's what does it mean? I want to know myself. So we all want to know ourselves. We all deep down. Then we forget about it because we can do nothing about it. So we go, you know, we go, we try to solve the problem by, you know, going outside ourselves and then we lose ourselves like I did. And then, you know, so if we start there as a, you know, is it self-evident? It is self-evident to me. And if you think a little bit is self-evident to you, that is what you want. Okay? So wanting means free will. Because if you are a machine, what do you want? As a machine, the next state of the machine is already defined by the algorithm. How about you want it? Does it make any sense? I don't want anything. But the question that's even made, there are no questions to a machine. There are only answers to a machine. So, in north to north itself, one must be conscious because conscious one allows one to know itself. So I define free will and consciousness. And why are those self-evident? Because you are conscious and you have free will, nine conscious and I have free will. So more self-evident than that, what is there? And if I start there, I can explain quantum physics by that posture. I can explain what physicists in 100 years have not understood. Quantum information is the representation of inner experience and the collapse of the wave function is the representation of my free will. What more do you want? I think it's a great theory because in bridging, as you say science and spirituality, the two are thought very distinct and very separate right because the... Well, it makes me think, I interviewed Donald Hoffman, you know, right? I think your foundation supports this word, right? Yeah. About five years. And he said something that stuck with me that he said that all these spiritual traditions that in a sense are saying what you are saying, that consciousness is fundamental, one wants to know itself and then we evolve the incarnation stories of the gods who incarnate, etc. So we know those stories. But the fact that they've always remained so elusive, so mystical, he said, it's nothing to be proud of. We should be like more concrete. We have also our rational faculty. We have science, so we now need to approach this with our sort of scientific mindset. So is that what you're trying to do here? What is more concrete than what I just said? And can it lead? I mean, you know, now, if you start here, we can show the science, not science, the quantum physics out of which everything else emerges, in fact, quantum information because the quantum state that is a representation of our experience is what then eventually determines the outer world. Okay? So I showed that by starting with the whole something that is kind of, you know, but it doesn't get you anywhere actually needs the physics that exists. And now from there, we go, we already saw the other problem is I'm not changing anything of physics. I'm reinterpreting completely what physics has been talking about. What do you want more? Is that is that Dawn wants to explain consciousness with mathematics and you cannot do that because consciousness creates mathematics. I wanted to do the same thing for many years and then I found out that I was wrong that it is consciousness that explains math and therefore you go from consciousness to math. You cannot go from math to consciousness because where does math come from otherwise? Is what will create a math? God? Well, come on. How does math exist? Is our creation in human mind? You bet. Federico, it was your intuition that led to your inventions that have changed the world. I think it's fair to say that or help change the world. Now you have this grand intuition, your theory about consciousness. How can this also lead to technology or to something tangible? Can we test it? Is it falsifiable? Of course it is. In fact, the next step is to now that I have a theory which is absolutely perfect and meaning it can be falsified, it can make it, it can make you know predictions and you can test the prediction. Can you name one? Oh yes, I can predict you know the trees are conscious and I can make experiments to show the trees are conscious and trees are no brain. So consciousness that is supposed to be coming off our brain, it comes off a tree that has no brain. Look at that. What do you think of that? It's amazing. Yeah, is this being done? I will do that. I cannot tell you how because I have to prove it and don't worry about it. I will do that. And I will do that. All right, okay. But you actually have a method, a scientific method of testing this. Yes, I will not discuss it any further. I will say, you know, would you agree with me that if I do that, I have disproved the consciousness is a product of the human brain or of the animal brain. Definitely. It's a good thing. All right, I will do that. That's a deal. Then you have proven that it takes cells, right? Then we are sort of on a cellular. Absolutely. Yeah, yeah. Absolutely. Absolutely. I will prove that. Yeah, you are sure of that? Absolutely. Take me to task. I will get it. I can guarantee you that I will get it. The something that people say, they cannot say anything. They will not have any objection anymore. So entanglement took over 30 years to prove that entanglement exists after the first experiment showed it exists because people didn't scientist didn't want entanglement. Einstein didn't want entanglement. So everybody, you know, Einstein, how can Einstein be wrong? So for 50 years, you couldn't do the experiments. Okay. Finally, when you could do experiments, the first experiment that proved that I spent with the Nobel Prize three years ago, four years ago, what is it? Anyway, see did that? Okay. Then all you did wrong, you couldn't do it, you know, blah, blah, blah. It took more than 30 years after that to, you know, cancel all the objections, you know, show the the objection where not valid. And finally, everybody now has to accept that there is entanglement, but nobody can explain it. Entanglement is what connects everything from the inside is what allows the world to be holistic, which is already what quantum physics is saying. Are you predicting, many people think of AI, sort of an invention that you were at the birth, at, right, with your work on neural networks? Yeah, back in the 80s, the second part of the 80s, yeah. People now think that AI will cause a paradigm shift. What's your response to that? Do you think that AI? Not only this theory will cause a paradigm shift, and not not because I'm, it's a theory that I developed, but only by changing the understanding of who we are can change, can change a paradigm. In fact, the paradigm ends with AI, this paradigm of scientism ends with AI, because AI is saying, machines will be better than us, which is crazy. Why does anybody want AI, despite that? Why does anybody want AI to be better than us? But AI cannot be better than us, because creativity is not algorithmic, it's not changing things randomly, and you know, because besides even if AI gives you a good idea, AI doesn't know that it is a good idea. You recognize the good idea of AI. But your consciousness, your understanding, your comprehension, and that's why AI can help us, and I applaud what has happened AI, but not the AI bests us and not the way AI unfortunately will be used to monetize us. That's not acceptable. I agree, I agree. I think you would also fully agree to that quote by Nicola Tesla, right? Yes, it's famous saying that the moment science will start studying consciousness more will be achieved in a decade than in the whole history of science. Absolutely, because we change the way we are. You know, thoughts are more important than stuff, right? I mean, from the inside you get the outside, not vice versa. And science doesn't recognize the existence of the inside, because consciousness is phenomenal, the brain. The brain makes the decision that informs your consciousness, we know where it is, but it doesn't have any cause of power, so who cares? Once we, people are convinced that we are conscious, that we are fields, that when the body dies, we don't die. I mean, that's a good news, right? I mean, you know, people want you to discharge your consciousness and experience in the computer and live forever for Christ's sake. I mean, you know, about transhumanism. I mean, you know, why do we need to do that? Besides, you know, you need to have a lot of money to pay for a billion years of electricity to keep you alive in a computer. So this is only a good recipe for very rich people, right? To live forever on a computer. The computer has to suck energy, right? So to make you live forever, you have to have a lot of money before you die, to give to people that tell you that you continue to die. Are you sure that you will be continuing to die in a computer? You know, a thousand years later. I fully agree. Where could this lead to? If that Tesla quote is true, if we would fully dedicate ourselves and trying to understand consciousness with your theory, even build technology with it, where could we be in a decade? I mean, could we break out of space-time, could we sort of live forever? What are your thoughts? Once you understand that consciousness is beyond matter, beyond this space and time. We already know that we can explore this world by going out of body with our consciousness. And millions of people, they go out of body, explores other realities. Consciousness is the tool for knowing infinitely more powerful than any instrument that we have ever built. We build billions of dollars of instruments to find out what the particles, you know, are doing, but consciousness is far, far richer. So we basically, then we can begin to explore the universe, the invisible universe. One, these are what? Mystics and sort of stages and in religions have been doing for thousands of years, but also a bit in a way that sometimes led to the waging of wars because people, and again, sort of use it for politics. Can we transcend that? Then what is the ultimate dream you have for society? But when you understand what you are, you know that the only way to work together is cooperation, non-competition. Today, there is only competition. Today, the purpose of life is the survival of the fittest. Is there anything worse than that as a purpose of life besides if you ask me, how do you define fitness? The only definition that they would give you is, oh, fitter is the one that survives. So what kind of a law is that? The survival of the what survives? I mean, it's topology. It's not even informative. So we believe, but you know, that definition of life is so wrong because it basically impedes you to be cooperative. It impedes us to work together to understand, but once you have a direct experience of who you are, when you are the observer and the observer, you know directly who you are. And when you know that, you know that only cooperation is the game. We have to work together. That's the only way. So competition will die off just by that experience. I cannot be competitive after that experience. It's impossible. You know, competition is not the competition. The competition that is allowed is that competition that allows me, no, no, me to win, me to be better than what I was the day before. Yeah, exactly. That's the only competition. The one wants to know itself and it's only one then also competing with one is not being out with one. But there's no competition. There's actually the urge to self-develop and to be more than you were. If we have one on the ultimate level and in the quantum fields and the unified field, right, how do we get to the many? How do we get to sort of on a still on a quantum level? You talk about sayities, right? How does one get to different or gazillions of sayities? Yeah. So if we start from that principle that postulate, then one wants to know itself, so the moment the one knows itself, he has to know completely itself because it's not metopartes. He cannot know a part of itself. He has to know the totality of itself. But to know itself, he has to, he have a flash and he cannot happen in different times. He has to happen in an instant that knows itself in its own totality. In that instant, it creates a part hole of itself. Just like a myosis, right? It's splitting of cells. Absolutely. That's where life takes form. Life is the reproduction of one. It's so fundamental that it is the reproduction of one. One, knowing itself creates another one part hole though because it creates many so it cannot be the totality. So he cannot copy itself. But he creates what he saw, what he got, what he understood itself to be. That's the identity of the field the one is created. It's not a copy you say, but it is a part hole. It's a different thing. Yeah. One is looking at itself in one direction and one is infinite direction in which he can know itself. The next time that he's looking seven in a different direction is another part hole. It's another monad. Libeness got it right. Libeness was the only philosopher, scientist, mathematician, technologist. I mean, it was incredible mind. Egotta, right? He understood that. But it was before quantum physics. It was way before we could make sense of it, but he got it right. And I call him, you know, before I knew, you know, of, because I didn't study philosophy, I got into what philosophers have been saying by inner experiences and then thinking about it, trying to understand them scientifically and understand them rationally. And I found that many people said the same things that I came up to through this process, to this inner process, not by reading books and repeating whatever. So the society that is sort of, the society is what I call a field that is conscious and is free will and wants to know itself. I call them society to distinguish them from the quantum fields which don't have consciousness, free will and don't want to know themselves. So, but they have all the characteristics of the quantum fields in the terms of what you can explain of them based on physics. But they go beyond that because they are inner life, you know, it's beyond physics. So, physics, they only explain qualia, which is the entry point to the inner world. But from qualia to meaning, as I said, there is comprehension and meaning, it's all new physics. And new physics can only go up to a certain point and then you have to leave even physics. It's got to go to what we now call metaphysics, but it's what can only be known from the inside. But, you know, it will take many centuries to go through. But the key thing though, it shows that physics now is incomplete because it doesn't even allow the inner world to exist. And the reason why they struggle for 80 years to unify quantum physics and general relativity is because the fundamental concepts of time, space, matter and energy are wrong. Then they're almost right, but they're not not so close to the truth that they allow you to bridge those, you know, to bring together into a unified physical field, what is now two separate, two separate, you know, one is a set of fields and the other one is the, you know, space time. Yeah. And gravity. And if we say the safety is, the safety is what we are. Yeah, exactly. So we are, right? And is the quantum fields with this characteristic? Yeah. But an identity, the identity is, the identity, my identity is how one has seen itself when it created me. Yeah. Oh, exactly. You're like a frame in a certain of the universe. Yeah. Imagine, you know, it's a beautiful way to understand this. Imagine that you have a multidimensional thing, okay? It's a multidimensional object, multidimensional meaning in where N is potentially infinite dimensions. How can you know this object? You can know this object by looking at this object through all the dimensions that are orthogonal that allow you to look at this object. It's, it's, it's look, you see something, then the next look you look at, so you're doing a tomography of an end dimensional thing. So it's one doing a tomography on itself. You see? Yeah. And what happens? I mean, for people to understand what happens when we die at the safety? We don't go anywhere because we never wear in the body. It's the body that dies if you don't die. But something, something changes, right? So because the safety, the safety that, see, a portion of the safety called ego is the portion of the safety that thinks to be the body. When the body, and so it looks at the information that the body provides about what? About this other world seeing through the body. So the, you know, our senses, our brain, you know, takes information from here, but it's a most small part of information. I mean, just, just visual, the visual thing that we see, you know, it's this narrow band, right? I mean, if I had cell phones instead of eyes, I would actually now be able to listen in to the 30,000 conversations that are going on that are here, here, here, here, they're all here. And I could see them, I could hear them, I could, you know, do this. But I only see this band, there is no, you know, there is no communication in this band, there are other stuff and we see this world, we constructed with the body. The body, the output of the body, which is in the cells, is quantum. That, that quantum output is what the fields perceive as color for shapes, sounds, and so on. The qualia, the qualia do not exist in the body, they exist in the field. And the qualia is this are representable with quantum state. Quantum state is how the quantum field transform, translates this information in the cells, which is, I call it live information. It's a type of information that has not been studied at all, not even imagined at all, which is in between quantum information and classical information. It is the, the stuff that makes the cell work. Because if you take an electron, take an electron, and the electron is matter, energy, and information. Can you separate these three in an electron? Is it elementary particles? There you go. So they are connected there. And it's like in the cells there's no distinction between hardware and software, right? They're like totally mingle. That's right. In a computer, they are separated because a computer is a deterministic reductionistic structure. Not a cell, not the deeper hospital. But basically you're saying so when the moment I die, that everything consciousness remains, just this narrow band that's avatar like VR headset that expands like. Well, basically, you know, I look, I kind of say in the book, a reducible, you know, I explain this by saying, imagine that you control a drone. You know, we are a body, controls a drone. There is enough gunnison, you know, watching around and semi-autonomous. So I don't have to worry about to, you know, I only had to express where I wanted to go. So high level language, you know, say, move right or whatever, drop the bomb or whatever, you know, because that's what we do with drones in these days. But, you know, so, so but anyway, so, so now the drone looks at that reality where it is, sends me information and I get the, I get the conscious experience of what the drone is seeing. That conscious experience is not in my body, is in my consciousness. And based on that, and based on my free will, I'll tell the drone what to do. The drone doesn't know anything. Now take this image. And when they, you know, somebody shoots it down, you know, and shoot it down, you know, you were so focused on that drone that you only saw what the drone was seeing because you were piloting it and you were concentrated. Then when the drone does a send you and you say, you look around, you say, oh my god, there is another world here. You see? Yeah. That's the same thing. The egg, the ego, when the body dies, you know, it doesn't look at the signals of the body anymore. And it looks around, oh shit, I'm, I'm, wow, look at this. And is it then, I mean, is it then, are we sitting there then, say at these level quantum, say, okay, let's go in again, here's another headset, try this one on. There we are again in a baby. Perhaps, but I cannot tell you what happens afterwards, but certainly, but certainly there are lots of, you know, near death experiences that are actually, you know, giving you evidence of what I'm saying. You know, people that arrive at the hospital, heart doesn't beat, brain doesn't have any electrical signals. They are clinically dead. They're not dead clearly if they are resuscitated, but, but they are for all practical purposes dead, okay? And they have an experience in the hospital. They see themselves in the operating table. They later tell what's going on while the brain has no electrical signal, the brain is not functioning. So how can you be outside of the body looking down at your body in the operating table? That's him, you cannot be explained, right? But of course, now people say, the scientists say, I just a fantasy, I don't come on, I mean, it's impossible, also, that's it. But that's what they do. Then they move outside of the, you know, they move in a different environment. They meet people, you know, their parents that were dead and friends that were dead. In some cases, they meet a friend that was, that they didn't know that it was dead. Then when they woke up, they, they find out that it died a day before and they didn't know, and they met this person in that reality, vast reality. They have an experience of expansion, love and joy and peace. And then somebody tells them, he'll go back because he haven't done what you were, what you came to this world to do. And then they wake up in the post operating room. But in that sort of drone metaphor, trying to understand this, I've always put sort of what I find hard to understand. Okay, so if my body is this drone or avatar or just a headset, then say the moment it dies, what headset are you putting on to have like just hover around and in this, in between spaces, is that another headset or another? That's a good question. I mean, I'm asking that question and it may be, in fact, it's likely that there is another body. I mean, people that have studied this thing talk about an astral body or an etheric body. And, you know, so clearly, there is another body. If this is true, but I believe it's true, I actually went out of body too, so I know that it's not imagination. You know that you are a body. Like when this energy came out of me, it was energy, it was physical. It was not imagination. It was physical, like an idron. How can I make it up? So there are lots of levels to get to one. There are many in the universe. Oh my goodness. Oh my goodness. I mean, the quantum field of electrons is in this theory, is conscious and has free will and he knows itself. Look at the, you know, then what are the electrons doing? The electrons are the symbols that the quantum field uses to communicate with other fields. All the electrons in the universe, how many electrons are in the universe, 10 to the 82, 83, 85? I don't know, but numbers that are unimaginable, you know, unimaginable, just the field of electrons. And all these electrons are its communication to the other fields to know itself. How many quantum fields are there? Can there be? A 17. Yeah. I'm asking because people you also call it quip, right? Quantum information, panpsychism. And panpsychism is of course, I know your version of it is different, but it's sort of being criticized for the fact that you have the combination problem, right? Why? Oh, there is no combination problem. The combination problem only in classical panpsychism. People never have a theory. Nobody had a theory of quantum panpsychism. The combination problem is not a problem in in quantum panpsychism. When you combine states, quantum states, you create a new state, which is more than the sum of the parts. And you can keep on going. You can keep on going. Of course, you can. Yeah, yeah. So we have solved that problem. People that say that, they don't understand what they're saying or they don't understand what we have developed this theory. The combination problem is solved completely. Yeah. It's classical panpsychism that doesn't solve the problem because in classical physics, the whole is only the sum of the parts. You cannot create a whole that is more than the sum of the parts. And that's why I was criticizing emergentism before because people, many physicists think that there is emerging emergent properties in the purely classical world. It cannot be emergentism requires quantumness. And it all realized because there is no boundary between classical and quantum. And so there is a seeping from quantum you go to classical and then they call emerging property as if he came from the classical. No, it comes every creation comes from the quantum world from the inner world. Is there an endpoint to the universe in a sense that can one, no, you already said that. The moment it knows itself, it splits off again in another part. So this will keep on going forever. In this theory, yes. But, you know, but, we know. But certainly there is no, you know, there cannot be any end and the reason is that, you know, that yourself, the more you know, the more there is to know because to know more, you make connections, new connections. And as you make new connections, you open up, you open up other possibilities. So it is an explosive thing. And, again, purely this is hypothetical, but I think they have possible legs. Why is space expanding faster than light at the edges? You know, because it's basically there is ever, you know, space is like a balloon that inflates. And this is the inflation. Now, the inflation was the early part of the universe. It's not called inflation. This is just the, you know, this is just, this is a consequence of having found that there is the universe is expanding exponentially at the horizon. So, which can only be explained if there is a, the universe is growing, the space is growing from within. Okay? In, in my model, my model space is the memory of the self-knowing of one. And because one knows ever more about the self-space must inflate, must grow exponentially. And you know that, you know, that quantum states only exist within a very narrow present. So, in order to remember your experience, you must put it into long-term memory. That's our theory also, it's selling that very clearly. So now, this present enriches itself of all the past that you have experience. But when you want to experience that past, you can only experience that in the present. So, experience can only exist in the present. Here you, here you, Envernardo, can shake hands as well. And, okay, so free will is fundamental consciousness is, and universe wants to know itself. But does it also create a consciousness, a society that has a sort of purpose? Do you think you were born with a certain purpose or sort of that? I think so. Yeah? I think so. And the reason why I am at peace with myself and happy about, you know, my life, what I do is because I know that I'm doing what I came here to do. I know it, you know, because how can I, you know, I wake up with new ideas. But why? You know, but they're all connected, all this stuff that I'm talking to you about. You know, it's like my mind keeps on running around, finding out where there are holes and understanding is now complete or whatever. You know, why am I doing that? It's beautiful. And what it sort of brings with me is that the universe and somehow is thinking to itself, okay, let's look to me because it's one from this different perspective. And let's really do that. Let's become Federico, let's become Hans, let's become, and really look at ourselves from that perspective. From that perspective, and then, but then, then you and I can know each other, can enter into resonance by communicating, because I cannot directly give you what I know and what I feel, right? And like, why is for you? So we had to communicate. And that communication brings into inner resonance. And if we keep on doing that, after a while, if we can create the same state internally, you and I, from that unity of state, then that's like the quantum superposition. Then you get a new entity. But then you entity does not destroy who we are. Basically, we can create another society like us, like one create, because we have the same properties of one, right? Except one point of view is that of the multiplicity upon the points of your one. So I create another, I can create another another society like myself, but not copy myself. So when we reach that, you and I create another society and they two join and they become one, which is with the two points of view join, the two points of view, mine and yours, you know, they now become a new combined point of view, that now has its own life and you know, it could proceed to that. And what that takes, what that takes is like truly connecting. You said becoming into resonance, which is something different. Which is exchanging classical information, right? Yeah, that's right, but that resonance means is a new quantum state. We are building a new quantum state, which is a common understanding, that common understanding creates a new society of a higher level. So we create a higher key of the satis. So we are at a very high level, but there are still many levels above us. And this is where things can take off because if we look at the world right now, at AI, we're talking classical information, we're shutting ourselves off, behind screens, sharing classical information, which are bits, it's not this information you're talking about. Not at all, not at all. And besides, we gave that knowledge to the computer. It didn't build it itself. I mean, we gave them the data, we exposed them to that information, even if it's, oh, you know, everything by itself, yeah, sure. Tell me about it. It's all bullshit. And yet, it's very useful. So I'm not, you know, I'm actually happy with if AI was used properly, it could speed up our self-knowing and everything else very rapidly. But I'm afraid that if we don't change, it will not be using this form. That's all. Thank you so much, Federico. I mean, pleasure. Yeah, it's been a great time. I am amazing, amazing. Thank you so much. Thank you so much.